doc/md/guides: Add article "Indexes with Included Columns in PostgreSQL" (#1176)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/guides/postgres/included-columns.md

---
id: included-columns
title: Indexes with Included Columns in PostgreSQL
slug: /guides/postgres/included-columns
---

> With PostgreSQL, we can create indexes with `INCLUDE` clauses, which are types of indexes that specify a list of columns to be included in the index as non-key columns. If used correctly, indexes with Included columns improve performance and reduce total costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With PostgreSQL, we can create indexes with `INCLUDE` clauses, which are types of indexes that specify a list of columns to be included in the index as non-key columns. If used correctly, indexes with included columns improve performance and reduce total costs.
```

### Basic PostgreSQL syntax for using `INCLUDE` clause with an index:

```sql
CREATE [UNIQUE] INDEX index_name
ON table_name(key_column_list)
INCLUDE(included_column_list);
```

### How do they work?

> A B-Tree index is made of two structures, 1) the B-tree and 2) The doubly linked list at the leaf node level of the B-tree. In an index with included columns, records of the columns mentioned in the `INCLUDE` clause are included in the ‘doubly linked list at the leaf node level of the B-tree’, corresponding to the heap(rows/tuples stored in a table)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A B-Tree index is made of two structures:
1. The B-tree
2. The doubly linked list at the leaf node level of the B-tree
In an index with included columns, records of the columns mentioned in the `INCLUDE` clause are included in the doubly linked list at the leaf node level of the B-tree, corresponding to the heap (rows/tuples stored in a table).
```

:::info

> Each index is stored separately from the table's main data area, which is called the table's heap in PostgreSQL terminology. On the other hand, Leaf pages are the pages on the lowest level of the index tree. To know more about B-tree index structure in PostgreSQL, visit PostgreSQL documentation [here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/btree-implementation.html#BTREE-STRUCTURE) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each index is stored separately from the table's main data area, which in PostgreSQL this is known as the table's _heap_.  Leaf pages are the pages on the lowest level of the index tree. To learn more about the B-tree index structure in PostgreSQL, visit the PostgreSQL documentation [here](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/btree-implementation.html#BTREE-STRUCTURE). 
```

:::

### When do we need them?

> Let's demonstrate an example where an index with an INCLUDE clause may be useful, by contrasting it with a unique index without an INCLUDE clause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's demonstrate an example where an index with an `INCLUDE` clause may be useful, by contrasting it with a unique index without an `INCLUDE` clause.
```

First, create a table with the following command:

```sql
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS "bankdb";

CREATE TABLE "bankdb" (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  savings varchar(100),
  first_name varchar(255),
  last_name varchar(255),
  email varchar(255),
  bank varchar(34)
);
```

Here is how a portion of the table might look like after inserting values:

```console title="Output"
-[ RECORD 1 ]--------------------------------------
id         | 1
savings    | 28 497
first_name | Amena
last_name  | Gardner
email      | a_gardner@aol.edu
bank       | GE77159307648978112812
-[ RECORD 2 ]--------------------------------------
id         | 2
savings    | 71 279
first_name | Joan
last_name  | Kaufman
email      | k-joan3559@google.couk
bank       | DK8023212366607361

.
.
.
-[ RECORD 1499 ]------------------------------------
id         | 1499
savings    | 4 880
first_name | Ramona
last_name  | Wilkins
email      | r.wilkins@google.net
bank       | BA928132235277210873
-[ RECORD 1500 ]------------------------------------
id         | 1500
savings    | 69 873
first_name | Imani
last_name  | Noble
email      | imaninoble@hotmail.net
bank       | BG45LBAX41796917951361
```

> Now, suppose we want to find the ID of a user by their email address. Let’s check the performance of the query with WHERE clause without any index, with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, suppose we want to find the ID of a user by their email address. Let’s check the performance of the query with a WHERE clause without any index, with the following command:
```

```sql
EXPLAIN ANALYZE
SELECT    
    first_name,
    last_name,
    email
FROM    
    "bankdb"
WHERE 
    email = 'd-abbott3425@google.edu';
```

```console title="Output"
QUERY PLAN                            
----------------
 Seq Scan on bankdb  (cost=0.00..38.75 rows=1 width=37) (actual time=0.180..0.181 
rows=1 loops=1)
   Filter: ((email)::text = 'd-abbott3425@google.edu'::text)
   Rows Removed by Filter: 1499
 Planning Time: 0.053 ms
 Execution Time: 0.195 ms
(5 rows)

Time: 0.626 ms
```

> Notice that the total cost is 38.75 units. If we want to use a unique index to accelerate the query, we can create it on the “email” column with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the total cost is 38.75 units. If we want to use a unique index to accelerate the query, we can create it on the `email` column with the following command:
```

```sql
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX emails_idx 
ON bankdb(email);
```
```console title="Output"
CREATE INDEX
Time: 10.316 ms
```

Now, let's check the performance of querying data of first and last names based on their email addresses, with the following command:

```sql
EXPLAIN ANALYZE
SELECT    
    first_name,
    last_name,
    email
FROM    
    "bankdb"
WHERE 
    email = 'd-abbott3425@google.edu';
```
```console title="Output"
QUERY PLAN                   
----------------------------------
 Index Scan using emails_idx on bankdb  (cost=0.28..8.29 rows=1 width=37) (actual 
time=0.200..0.203 rows=1 loops=1)
   Index Cond: ((email)::text = 'd-abbott3425@google.edu'::text)
 Planning Time: 0.081 ms
 Execution Time: 0.259 ms
(4 rows)

Time: 1.470 ms
```

> Notice that total cost is now 8.29 units. The performance of the query has improved by creating a primary key index on “email” column, compared to 38.75 units without using any index. The engine still has to fetch the “first_name” and “last_name” columns from the table (also known as “Heap fetches”).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the total cost is now 8.29 units. The performance of the query has improved by creating a primary key index on `email` column, compared to 38.75 units without using any index. The engine still has to fetch the `first_name` and `last_name` columns from the table (also known as "heap fetches").
```

> Let's drop the existing index to demonstrate next section in the article

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's drop the existing index to demonstrate the next section in the article:
```

```sql
DROP INDEX emails_idx;
```
```console title="Output"
DROP INDEX
Time: 3.856 ms
```

Suppose we want to accelerate the same query using the INCLUDE clause.

> In the following command, we have created an index with an INCLUDE clause that precisely covers “first_name” and “last_name” columns which are part of the query for which we are trying to improve performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following command, we will create an index with an `INCLUDE` clause that precisely covers `first_name` and `last_name` columns which are part of the query for which we are trying to improve performance.
```

```sql
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX emails_idx 
ON bankdb(email)
INCLUDE(first_name,last_name);
```

```console title="Output"
CREATE INDEX
Time: 8.942 ms
```

Now, let's check the performance of querying data of first and last names based on their email addresses, with the following command:

```sql
EXPLAIN ANALYZE
SELECT    
    first_name,
    last_name,
    email
FROM    
    "bankdb"
WHERE 
    email = 'd-abbott3425@google.edu';
```
```console title="Output"
QUERY PLAN                 
---------------------------------------
 Index Only Scan using emails_idx on bankdb  (cost=0.28..4.29 rows=1 width=37) (ac
tual time=0.228..0.231 rows=1 loops=1)
   Index Cond: (email = 'd-abbott3425@google.edu'::text)
   Heap Fetches: 0
 Planning Time: 0.233 ms
 Execution Time: 0.283 ms
(5 rows)
```

> Notice that the total cost is now 4.29, which is significantly lower compared to 8.29 while using a unique index without the INCLUDE clause. Because, the query only scanned the index in order to get the data. As a result, “Heap fetches” is also zero, which means the query does not access any tables to retrieve the records. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the total cost is now 4.29, which is significantly lower, compared to 8.29 which we got while using a unique index without the `INCLUDE` clause. We were able to reduce the total cost because the query only scanned the index in order to get the data. As a result, `heap fetches` is also zero, which means the query does not access any tables to retrieve the records. 
```

:::info

> You might be wondering why we didn’t just use `CREATE INDEX ON bankdb(email,first_name,last_name)` instead of using the `INCLUDE` clause? One of the advantages by using the `INCLUDE` clause is having fewer levels of B-tree. All the `INCLUDE` columns are stored in the doubly linked list of the B-tree index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might be wondering why we didn’t just use `CREATE INDEX ON bankdb(email,first_name,last_name)` instead of using the `INCLUDE` clause. One of the advantages of using the `INCLUDE` clause is having fewer levels in a  B-tree. All `INCLUDE` columns are stored in the doubly linked list of the B-tree index.
```

:::

### Advantages of using Indexes with an INCLUDE clause:

> 1. B-tree part of the B-tree index has fewer levels as they do not contain include columns

Reviewer: This is confusing :) 
Maybe just write:
1. The B-tree has fewer levels because they do not contain include columns
Do you think that has the same meaning?

Author: Yes it has same meaning, replaced with your suggested sentence! Thanks! :)

> 2. Greatly improved performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Greatly improves performance
```

3. Has the ability to return the contents of non-key columns without having to visit the index's table

### Limitation of using Indexes with included columns
- Expressions are not supported as included columns since they cannot be used in index-only scans.

## Managing indexes with included columns is easy with Atlas

> Managing indexes and database schemas in PostgreSQL can be confusing and error-prone. Atlas is an open-source project which allows us to manage our database using a simple and easy-to-understand declarative syntax (similar to Terraform). We will now learn how to manage  indexes with included columns using Atlas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Managing indexes and database schemas in PostgreSQL can be confusing and error-prone. Atlas is an open-source project which allows us to manage our database using a simple and easy-to-understand declarative syntax (similar to Terraform). We will now learn how to manage indexes with included columns using Atlas.
```

ON bankdb(email);
```
```console title="Output"
CREATE INDEX
Time: 10.316 ms
```

Now, let's check the performance of querying data of first and last names based on their email addresses, with the following command:

```sql
EXPLAIN ANALYZE
SELECT    
    first_name,
    last_name,
    email
FROM    
    "bankdb"
WHERE 
    email = 'd-abbott3425@google.edu';
```
```console title="Output"
QUERY PLAN                   
----------------------------------
 Index Scan using emails_idx on bankdb  (cost=0.28..8.29 rows=1 width=37) (actual 
time=0.200..0.203 rows=1 loops=1)
   Index Cond: ((email)::text = 'd-abbott3425@google.edu'::text)
 Planning Time: 0.081 ms
 Execution Time: 0.259 ms
(4 rows)

Time: 1.470 ms
```

Notice that the total cost is now 8.29 units. The performance of the query has improved by creating a primary key index on `email` column, compared to 38.75 units without using any index. The engine still has to fetch the `first_name` and `last_name` columns from the table (also known as "heap fetches").
Let's drop the existing index to demonstrate the next section in the article:

```sql
DROP INDEX emails_idx;
```
```console title="Output"
DROP INDEX
Time: 3.856 ms
```

> Suppose we want to accelerate the same query using the INCLUDE clause.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Suppose we want to accelerate the same query using the `INCLUDE` clause.
```

### Limitation of using Indexes with included columns
- Expressions are not supported as included columns since they cannot be used in index-only scans.

## Managing indexes with included columns is easy with Atlas

Managing indexes and database schemas in PostgreSQL can be confusing and error-prone. Atlas is an open-source project which allows us to manage our database using a simple and easy-to-understand declarative syntax (similar to Terraform). We will now learn how to manage indexes with included columns using Atlas.

:::info
If you are just getting started, install the latest version of Atlas using the guide to [setting up Atlas](https://atlasgo.io/cli/getting-started/setting-up).
:::

### Managing Indexes with included columns in Atlas

We will first use the `atlas schema inspect` command to get an HCL representation of the table which we created earlier by using the Atlas CLI:

```console
atlas schema inspect -u "postgres://postgres:mysecretpassword@localhost:5432/bankdb?sslmode=disable" > schema.hcl
```
```hcl title="schema.hcl"
table "bankdb" {
  schema = schema.public
  column "id" {
    null = false
    type = serial
  }
  column "savings" {
    null    = true

>     type    = character_varying(100)

Reviewer 2: Please, use `varchar` (shorter form) instead: https://atlasgo.io/atlas-schema/sql-types#string-1
